# Wildfire MS
Data and code for manuscript: Wildfire influences species assemblage and habitat utilisation of boreal wildlife after more than a decade in northern Sweden.

<b>Abstract</b>

Active fire suppression has long affected the natural role of fire in shaping boreal ecosystems in northern Europe. Recently, managers actively re-introduced fires through prescribed burning to promote biodiversity, and natural fires have increased in frequency, possibly due to global warming. Fires can strongly change the vegetation structure and thus the availability of food and shelter for wildlife. Here, we used extensive studies of wildlife responses to wildfire from boreal systems in North America to predict how wildlife might respond to wildfires in Fennoscandia, where these responses are understudied. We then tested our predictions by measuring wildlife utilization of three areas in northern Sweden, comparing sites that burned by wildfire in 2006, with nearby unburnt control sites. To measure wildlife utilization of the whole wildlife assemblage, we used 24 camera traps per area, equally divided between the burnt and control sites, with two different placement strategies: random and on wildlife trails. The cameras were active during summer 2018 and recorded 27 mammal and bird species. Species assemblage differed between burnt and control sites. We found increased utilization of semi-domesticated reindeer (Rangifer tarandus), pine marten (Martes martes) and western capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus) in control compared to burnt sites, while none of the species utilized the burnt sites more than the controls. We thus did not find support for a positive effect of past forest fires on wild mammals and birds, in contract to what has previously been found for other taxonomic groups. We think that this might be caused by the intensive forest management in Sweden resulting in other habitats, e.g., clearcuts, providing pioneer vegetation that is usually associated with burnt sites.

<b>Description</b>
The EDD corrected visitation frequencies for all wildlife species at all sites are given in Data.csv. All code for the analyses using ManyGLM are given in ManyGLM.R
